====================================
Harness Selection for Basic Climbing
====================================

:author:    Climbing Technical Advisory Committee
:contact:   ctac-mountaineers@gmail.com
:DocId:     2019-04
:version:   2.0.0 (draft)
:Published: April 4, 2019
:Modified:  April 4, 2019

Abstract
========

This report discusses the selection of an appropriate climbing harness for the Mountaineers Basic Climbing class and experience climbs.
CTAC recommends that Basic students use general-purpose rock climbing harnesses—rather than lightweight or other special-purposed harneses—as their main climbing harness for these programs.
Based on manufacturer recommendations and the relevant climbing equipment standards, CTAC finds that the specialized harnesses are not an appropriate choice for beginners participating in an introductory course where a variety of techniques are introduced.
In addition, CTAC recommends that lightweight harnesses not be used by students during experience climbs, though leaves the final determination regarding exceptions to course or climb leaders, based on the particular circumstances.

Introduction
============

An incident occurred during a Mountaineers Basic Climbing Course activity in May of 2019, in which the leg-loop buckle on a Basic student's harness "snapped" while the student was on rappel.
This rappel was a part of a required rock outing for the course and the student was protected with a back-up belay throughout the rappel.
This was not a catastrophic harness failure and the climber was not technically at risk [1]_, but the event understandably caused some alarm for both the student and the instructors.

Once the student was safely lowered to the ground, everyone involved with the incident examined the harness to see fully understand what had failed and why.
The Basic student was using a light-weight harness for this rock outing, despite the harness manufacturer's recommendation that its use be limited to experienced climbers for ski mountaineering.
The leg loops clip to the main harness with a small plastic buckle, and it was that buckle that "snapped" during the rappel.

This incident prompted the Safety Committee to reach out to CTAC for general recommendations on what types of harnesses would be appropriate for Basic students to use for this course.
In our report below, we look at the unique needs of the Basic Climbing class and highlight what Basic climbers and their instructors should look for when choosing or recommend a harness for this course.

.. [1] According to a response to a similar complaint on their website, the manufacturer states that "the harness will still function if a buckle were to come undone or break as these are just to help orient you during rappels". (https://www.blackdiamondequipment.com/en_US/climbing-harnesses/couloir-BD651084_cfg.html)


Choosing a Harness
==================

There is a huge variety of harnesses on the market, designed for many different types of circumstances and terrain.
This can make the process of selecting a single harness course difficult for inexperienced Basic climbers.
CTAC members have personally observed that a large amount of publicly-available information on climbing equipment (e.g., such as manufacturer marketing, online reviews, peer feedback, etc.) often emphasizes the benefits of smaller size or lighter-weight designs, rather than general-purpose use.
Without prior climbing experience to draw from, it is difficult for Basic students to sift through this information and make an appropriate buying decision.

Generally, we can simplify the types of harnesses in to two main varieties: those that are designed for limited types of terrain or application (i.e., "specialized"), and those that are not.
The specialized varieties often sacrifice harness comfort or robustness in order to decrease volume or weight, whereas the general-purpose harness designs typically focus on overall versatility and durability.

The Mountaineers Basic Climbing Course is designed to introduce new climbers to multiple disciplines of climbing, including rock, glacier and steep snow and ice.
The course covers basic climbing techniques and a large variety of technical skills, including lead and follower belaying, vertical and low-angle rappelling, mechanical advantage haul systems, and rope-ascension using friction hitches.
Each of these climbing disciplines and skills put unique demands on the climber's harness, and it is imperative that harnesses used by Basic students can adequately handle all of these demands.

It is well-known to most Mountaineers that the Basic Climbing course can impose a non-trivial financial burden on incoming students.
Understandly, most incoming Basic climbing students will purchase a single climbing harness that they intend to use for all course-related activities and climbs.
It is thus important that whichever harness Basic students obtains, it is suitable for the varied demands placed upon it by this program.
By design, specialized harnesses are not up to the task.
A light-weight alpine or ski mountaineering harness, for example, is not meant to be used for extended rock outings, a critical component of the Basic course.
Not only would it go against the manufacturer's recommend use the equipment, but the reduced climber comfort may further distract the climber and negatively impact the student's overall experience. 

.. A large class of these harnesses, such as the Black Diamond Couloir, are optimized for specific types of terrain where the wearer does not expect to spend a significant amount of time hanging or falling.

Given the lack of climbing experience of most Basic students, it falls on the Basic course and climb leaders and instructors to help educate the incoming Basic students on what makes a harness appropriate for use in the course.

What to Look For
----------------

Due to the varied nature of the Basic curriculum, CTAC recommends that a general-purpose rock harness be the standard for Basic Climbing students, due to their general robustness and durability.
Basic instructors and mentors should be clear when making recommendations on this critical component of the safety system and actively dissuade students from purchasing special-purpose harnesses for use in the Basic course.

Examples of harnesses that would be suitable include the `Black Diamond Momentum`__ and the `Petzl Corax`__, though plenty of others exist as well.
More generally, features of a harness that CTAC recommends students look for include when making a purchasing decision include:

* they have been designed for extended use in vertical rock terrain;
* they have a dedicated belay loop;
* they have a comfortably padded belt, to accommodate extended hanging by the user (e.g., during longer rappels, self-rescue practice, etc.); and
* they have visually verifiable safety-buckles.

__ https://www.blackdiamondequipment.com/en_US/momentum-harness-men%27s-BD651075_cfg.html
__ https://www.petzl.com/US/EN/Sport/Harnesses/CORAX

Are There Exceptions?
---------------------

CTAC acknowledges that despite best efforts to encourage Basic students to use a general-purpose rock harness for all course activities, there will inevitably be situations where someone shows up to an event with a lightweight or special-purpose harness.
In these cases, CTAC leaves the final decision on whether to allow the use of the harness to the activity leader, but recommends those types of harnesses be disallowed for any activities that place high or extended strain on the harness, such as rappelling, hanging, ascending, or falling.
An example of a scenario where a leader might permit the use of lightweight harnesses may be on a moderate glacier climb, where the main objective is to reach a safe high-point, and not to spend dedicated time practicing those types of skills.

References and Further Reading
==============================

For other takes on how to choose an climbing harness, we recommend the following resources as starting points:

* British Mountaineering Council. `Harnesses: A Guide for Climbers and Mountaineers`__.
* Mountain Equipment Co-op.  `How To Choose a Climbing Harness`__. (accessed Oct 2019)  .
* REI Co-Op.  `How to Choose Climbing Harnesses`__.  (accessed Oct 2019).
* Rock & Ice, The Climber's Magazine.  `How to Choose a Harness`__.  (accessed Oct 2019).

__ https://www.thebmc.co.uk/Handlers/DownloadHandler.ashx?id=1336
__ http://www.mec.ca/en/explore/how-to-choose-a-climbing-harness
__ http://www.rei.com/learn/expert-advice/climbing-harness.html
__ http://www.rockandice.com/gear/buying-tips/how-to-choose-a-harness

For more information regarding harness safety standards, we recommend the following:

* European Standards, CSN EN 12277+A1.  "Mountaineering equipment - Harnesses - Safety requirements and test methods".  2018.
* George Steel, Union Internationale des Associations d'Alpinisme, UIAA Standard 105.  "Harnesses: Recommendations for Inspection and Retirement".  2001.
* American Society for Testing and Materials, ASTM F1772-17. `Standard Specification for Harnesses for Rescue and Sport Activities`__. (accessed Oct 2019)

__ http://www.astm.org/Standards/F1772.htm 

Conclusions
===========

The Basic Climbing Course covers a broad spectrum of climbing skills and techniques, and Basic students need to have and use a climbing harness that can meet the varied demands.
Given their lack of climbing experience, it is up to course instructors to help steer Basic students towards purchasing an appropriate harness for this course.
Given that most students will use a single type of harness for all activities, CTAC recommends that Basic students obtain a standard, general-purpose rock climbing harness for this course.
Our experience suggests that light weight or other special-purpose climbing harnesses are not capable of meeting the varied course demands, and would often require using a harness outside of the manufacturer's recommended setting.
However, we also understand that every situation is unique, and ultimately suggest leaving the final say on whether or not a student's particular harness is appropriate for an activity up to the activity's leader.
